foreign all we're doing here is we're
actually
freeing the blocking of emotions by
feeling our body and creating love where
there was abandonment
welcome to the art of accomplishment
where we explore how deepening
connection with ourselves and others
leads to creating the life we want with
enjoyment and ease I'm Brett Kistler
here today with my co-host Joe Hudson
[Music]
oh boy what a week
I don't even want to get into it I'm
just going to say what a week
it's been strange I think it feels that
way for a lot of when people are
listening it might not be this way but I
most of the people
I talk to it feels like there's kind of
a certain amount of overwhelm I don't
know if it's because like we're all
getting
fully back into life after covet or what
it is but there does seem to be like a
lot of people aren't overwhelmed right
now yeah definitely lots of things
changing after covid but oh also
sometimes there's just stuff in the air
whatever it is yeah things happen and uh
you find yourself in these little
pressure cookers that the Universe
creates for us to learn from
right yeah yeah yeah
which is great because uh today we're
talking about Shame Shame which is one
of the things that we find ourselves in
the midst of and when we find ourselves
in sort of a pressure cooker situation
in life last week we talked about
Shameless apologies and uh I think it
would be really good to get into really
what exactly the shame part of that is
like what is it what actually is shame
how does it show up and how is it that
it seeps its way into so many parts of
our life including the ways that we make
apologies but many other things as well
yeah you know I think there's so many
ways of looking at shame the way that I
I like to look at it is that it is
Nature's Way of training us to be good
citizens right it's not a perfect
methodology
or good tribe members or good family
members or something like that and the
way it it works for the most part is
that when you are ostracized from the
group you feel shame so an example of
this would be let's say you're sitting
with your aunts your and you are
flatulent you fart and all the aunts
laugh there's not going to be any shame
like you're a little kid right you're
five years old
but if you're five years old and you
fart and all your aunties are like oh
shame on you know have that kind of like
you shouldn't have done that attitude
then you're gonna feel shame
so shame is this mechanism that we have
that teaches us on an emotional level
how we should and shouldn't be I haven't
seen any research on this but my
personal experiences is that there's
actually natural shame as well meaning I
think that there's
like all human beings are equipped with
a certain way of acting and that they're
gonna their system's gonna feel shame if
they don't act in that way generally
um so it seems like that's a natural
thing that happens for folks that can be
overridden or destroyed in somebody but
it seems to be there
I remember when I was like five years
old I had this experience of
I was at this school fair and there was
a raffle and I was like at the raffle
table my parents were doing something
else and
and there was like this GI Joe
figure and he had a like amphibious unit
and I really wanted to play with it so I
took it off the table and started
playing and and this guy got really
angry at me well where's your mother and
my mom came over and my mom's like he's
five he doesn't know he's just playing
with her whatever he wants to play with
like relax and so I didn't get in
trouble this guy was yelling at me but I
remember that when my mom said that
I got this kick in my stomach of Shame
it was just like this kick and though
she wasn't upset at me he was upset at
me the shame didn't come when he was
upset at me the shame came at that
moment when I knew I shouldn't have
taken the the thing off the
of the table and my mom was defending me
and I remember that feeling and I
remember for like a year after that
every time I would
think of that feeling I'd get that kick
in the stomach again like it was like I
have this very
specific memory of it and not wanting to
feel that
and looking back at it now I realized it
that was the second thing that Shane was
doing which shame just seems to stop all
the emotions
and like stagnates emotion
so you don't get emotional fluidity and
so that's the other interesting thing
that shame does is it just kind of
stagnates the emotion which means that
you shame is often something that people
get stuck in for years and years and
years and years and years because it is
a slowing effect on or a stopping effect
of the emotional fluidity yeah you've
mentioned before that you you once wrote
a list of all the things that
you that hadn't changed in your life
over 10 years and every single one of
them had shame around it so like last
night as I Was preparing for this
episode I I wrote a list of all the
different kinds of shame that I felt
over the past year shames that I avoided
and I didn't take any action based on
and I looked at all the things that
would have occurred in my life if I had
actually just taken the actions that I
had the shame around and some examples
were you know shame of missed
opportunity shame of feeling
transactional shame of being salesy
shame of not being able to take care of
people shame of drawing a messy boundary
and all these all these different things
that it was just a little bit easier
just not to do that and I look back and
I'm like man I would have had a really
different year and it would have been
like it's really exciting to think about
what might have happened had I just done
all those things I was ashamed of and
also from where I'm sitting right now it
doesn't feel like there was actually any
real danger in that shame other than
just stepping out of my comfort zone
yeah yeah that's the interesting thing
is like let's say the shame of being
salesy or transactional or something
like that that's something that a lot of
people have learned you know so I work
with some people in business and they're
just like of course I'm looking out for
my interests of course I'm and and I
respect other people who are doing that
and that and of course that person's
selling because that's their job they
have a business and of course they
should be selling and I would like them
to you know see me as human and not be
too forceful about it but that's their
job and then I have other people just
like as soon as they think about
marketing or sales they like they're
like ooh gross and I don't want to do
that and their shame around it and a lot
of that is just what you've been taught
by your specific Society you know your
specific tribe and that's the amazing
thing about it is that
all these people in today's society it's
not like we all grew up in the same
tribe generally and there is like the
Norms of that like micro civilization
it's like your neighbor could have a
completely different set of shames than
you have
which is just fascinating like the
opportunity is you get to really
say what are the social norms I want to
live by
and that I want the people around me to
live by you get to think about that as
you're addressing us in your own shame
which is cool yeah I feel like a good
metaphor for this is like an electric
dog fence you know you have this you
have a road that has cars on it and dogs
get hit by cars and that's not good so
you put a fence around it you want your
dog to feel relatively free and you
don't want to build a physical fence
around your yard so you put an electric
fence in and then you train the dog by
having it approach the fence and it gets
the shock collar and every time it gets
a shock collar it's like unexpected
and it recognizes that something
something is wrong and it goes into this
like
uh there's like a nervous system
shutdown and then it just doesn't do
that thing anymore and then after it's
been trained you can actually turn the
fence off and it's just not going to go
where that fence had been
and maybe it's not feeling Shame about
going there but it's it's the same kind
of nervous system response where we we
develop these habits of oh yeah I'm not
going to go there I'm not going to do
that that's going to get me rejected and
then we just often don't question it and
we just live in that electric fence that
we've built for ourselves or that
Society or our parents you know kind of
trained us on and it's interesting that
you mentioned now that you know
everybody has a different electric fence
and we have all these different micro
societies interacting so there's just so
much tension around like what
what are you in so much shame for what's
going on or you should feel shame you
should be ashamed and then we have this
like whole thing where people use shame
as a tool for social justice or to try
to change behavior in society which just
doesn't work no makes people rebel
against it especially if they don't
agree and the other thing that's really
cool about your metaphor is that they I
don't know if you know this but there's
dogs that learn that if they just go
through that fence really quickly it's
worth it
so they just like run really quickly and
that like it shocks them but it it only
shocks them for like a little bit of a
ton because they're out of the Zone
because it only shocks you within the
zone and and that happens with people
too and as far as shame so let's say you
have a natural habit like sex meaning
that it is in your nature to have sex I
mean it is it's more than in your nature
it's all you can almost say your nature
is to have sex right because if we
didn't have sex we wouldn't be here it's
as much as it is to eat as much as it is
to eat so if you throw shame onto that
urge right which most of society has
done or onto eating for that matter or
onto eating for that matter then you
start associating shame with I mean it's
like things that wire together fire
together
so every time sex happens shame happens
there's actually something that happens
where people get addicted to shame I
would say where there the the shame is
the addiction
and so sex is an Australian unless
there's a little bit of Shame with it or
eating isn't it or shopping isn't as
thrilling if there isn't a little bit of
Shame with it so there's actually
there's this weird thing that happens
which is a lot like the dog running
through the fence it's like I want that
thing I want to be roaming and I will
take that shock and it'll just kind of
like add to the to the thrill of getting
through and making it happen which is
totally fascinating to me and and I
think that's the other thing that
happens as far as keeping bad habits in
place there's this great quote that says
shame is the locks that hold the chains
of bad habits in place
and I think this is one of the big
mechanisms for it is because we actually
become addicted to the shame
because we want the stuff that comes
with it like sex or food or things or
a bunch of stuff in in our nature yeah
so just keep going back to that shame
place but then not actually getting the
thing that we want because we're locked
up in shame and it blocks our emotions
and right the emotions are part of our
experiencing that the actual thing if
we're not feeling the emotions then
we're not actually right so it's an
empty ghost syndrome it's like oh I got
the the thing that I wanted but I didn't
get to enjoy it completely because
there's shame and so it doesn't actually
fully fulfill me so I need to do it
again and again and again and again this
seems like it would be a maladaptive
evolutionary thing for to go into
something where we feel shame and then
all of our processing shuts down like
that doesn't seem optimal what's what's
going on what is going on with this it
keeps us inside the fence right that's
the thing is it keeps us inside of that
line which is what we need
evolutionarily to exist as tribe
right like as a small group as a village
as
a nation to some degree like we need to
stay within that fence or we're just not
going to work out as well and so yes
it's not perfectly adapted but it had a
reason and the reason to some degree is
useful I mean
people without shame they're Psychopaths
right that's the name for them is is
Psychopaths as people without shame and
they will
like hurt people and then Society will
completely fall apart if we had a
society of psychopaths I don't think
that the society would operate very well
right it sounds like one of the one of
the variables here is just that Society
is now changing so much more rapidly
than it used to you know just with
everything that it relates to our
nervous system is just that everything
is changing faster than it ever used to
change so our every part of our nervous
system needs to be able to update faster
in order to maintain contact with what
reality is now and not what it was 100
000 years ago and maybe and maybe it's
possible as well that like some of the
ways that it's adapting aren't good for
the long run either right so it's kind
of it's It's a
you know I have no idea what's going to
happen societally speaking but what I
can say is that what's happening with
the shame in people that I work with is
that
when they feel shame around something
they usually are stuck in that habit and
they're usually stuck in that mode for
an extended period of time and to be
able to
address and lift the shame is
fantastic and the the crazy thing about
addressing and lifting that shame is
that there's an intellectual basis to it
and there's also an emotional basis to
it and you don't really get the lift
without the emotional basis meaning a
lot of people know okay yes I realized
that the church told me sex was bad I
realized that you know my grandmother
told me sex was bad but I know sex isn't
bad yet I still feel shame wanting sex
and I still recreate sex in a way that I
get to feel shame instead of having sex
in a way that would make me feel no
shame I I continually choose to have sex
in a way that that gives me shame that
whole thing that happens is has to be
addressed with the emotions behind it
you can't just address it intellectually
it doesn't change anything for people
yeah in fact even that can just increase
the level of tension that you feel
internally if you intellectually know
that you quote shouldn't feel this shame
and your body does feel the shame and
you don't know what to do it about it
then you can actually just stress
yourself out even more and just vibrate
in place yes yes yeah I've found myself
in that a lot yeah I can describe
everything thing that's wrong with me
but I haven't but yeah but nothing has
changed that's a real that's a like a
little slice of pain and discomfort yeah
exactly one thing that I noticed though
is so when we're talking about you know
being the dog that runs through the
electric fence which is like you know
I'm gonna get my freedom you know
sometimes he'll run straight through the
electric fence and get hit by a car yes
and that's like that's one of the things
that you just have to kind of do you
just have to accept that it's like okay
if I'm gonna move through the thing that
my entire system thinks is going to hurt
me or get me ostracized to find out if
that's true sometimes I am going to get
ostracized and find out that it's true
and sometimes maybe I won't I don't
think it's necessary I think running
through the fence just starts wiring
stuff together and and so I don't think
that's necessary I think it's just far
better to turn off the fence so to speak
meaning that like really address the
shame underneath it and really
investigate it both emotionally and
intellectually and watch it fall apart
and then take your action one of the
ways to do that is to really feel the
want
in the shame itself meaning
like really feel the desire to like what
is the sexual experience you do want
what is the eating experience that you
do want right because usually the one
that's wired with shame is not the one
that you actually want
so it's also seen that there's nothing
to be like to really intellectually
take apart
the thing that people think that they
should be ashamed of
so that it can't exist yeah I think this
can lead to another interesting place
especially in in self-development or
self-exploration where it's easy for us
to identify the shames that we're like
kind of ready to let go of and not
identify the ones that are deeper and so
we might go on a mission where we're
like you know what I feel a lot of Shame
about sex so what I'm gonna do is I'm
just gonna
you know deconstruct all of my sex shame
and I'm gonna go have all the sex that I
want and then they're not gonna maybe
you might not notice that there's
actually deeper shames in there that
you're also recreating like shames of
Abandonment or shames of
uh like recklessness or just like all
kinds of different things that you're
still recreating in the way that you're
going about exploring your newfound
freedom in the one shame area that
you're exploring and that might take a
couple of years of a process before you
realize oh wait I actually
was using using this exploration of
shame to run more further from other
shames that I wasn't looking at you know
if you have a group of people around you
the best way to
to address the shame is to see that
you're loved within the action you can't
do this by yourself but it's a cool
thing to do it's like
if you're having shame around the way
that you eat for instance
how do you create a situation where
you're loved for
you're the way that you eat how do you
create a situation where you can be
appreciated where there's nothing that
you have to hide that you're not like
sneaking into the corner and hiding
and so it's like
like when we do like a lot of our
courses one of the things that we do is
create that container of love because a
lot of what people are ashamed of nobody
else has a problem with it's amazing
you'll hear somebody in one of our
workshops and they'll be like oh I want
to feel pleasure and they won't even say
what kind of pleasure that is and
they'll be like oh I feel ashamed to
even want
I feel
selfish I feel ashamed for even wanting
to feel pleasure and I'll ask hey does
anybody here have a problem with them
feeling pleasure who here wants this
person to have a life that's full of
pleasure
and it's it's like that perpetually it's
like if I asked a room full of people
and said hey who here has a problem with
Brett wanting to make his business
really successful and going out there
and really selling his business so that
it can be successful as long as it's in
alignment with who he is anybody opposed
to that nobody would say that they were
opposed to that right and so to really
see and feel that love is an amazing
thing
and that changes shame because shame is
often put in place because of you know a
society telling us that we were bad or
wrong or being ostracized yeah I guess I
wonder here one of the things that you
said is it's you know it's maybe not
about having not running straight
through the electric fence and finding
out what happens because that might be a
little bit
that might be more likely just to
recreate it and so it's more about just
inspecting it you can create a group for
yourself of people where you can you can
test it out which you know there's uh
there's that saying that we're
traumatized in relationship and we're
healed in relationship where especially
for something like shame which is such a
social social type programming
that for not just our intellect but for
our whole body
our whole nervous system to experience
the unexpected which is to be loved for
the thing that we are ashamed of
is really what's kind of required to get
down to that yeah if you're doing it
with other people that is the quickest
way but there's there's lots of ways to
address it within yourself and you
mentioned this a while ago one of the
ways to address it in yourself is to not
recreate the behaviors so what I notice
is like so for instance one of the
things that we'll go through in some of
the courses is people getting in touch
with their anger and being able to move
their anger but not at anybody not in a
way that hurts anybody but just like let
that energy move and to learn how to
love it in that process
they might get anger angry at somebody
or they might break something so then
they can go see anger isn't safe they'll
create the shame to reinforce the
the world view or reinforce the identity
and that's one of the coolest things
about shame is that it does like create
it's a it is kind of the outline of our
identity often you know part of the
outline of our identity is the things
that we are ashamed of yeah and it can
be subtle there's just when when you
have a couple layers of Shame over a
possible action you might take it just
doesn't occur to you that it that action
is even possible or that that this
version of you might even exist right
there's just no I'm just not that way
I've always been this way and not that
way I'm you know I'm not a salesy kind
of person somebody might say okay you
know or I'm just not into sex right yeah
exactly but what I notice is that we
have this natural desire to unfold this
natural desire to
flourish this natural desire to become
more and more free and
we will as one part unfolds we will
start running up against those things
that we can't see we start running up
against the shames that we are that are
so deep in us that we're not aware of
today let's say somebody doesn't have a
group around them and they want to do
some personal self-exploration on shame
I just described what I did yesterday
and that was really helpful which was
just writing down as many subtle types
of shame that I could find uh that that
I found were just subtly something that
I just didn't want to didn't want to
feel so I didn't take an action that
would have led me in that direction I
went in some other direction and then I
you know find myself deeper and deeper
into my comfort zone and then some form
of stagnation occurs
um I'm curious what what are some
practices that somebody could take
individually to explore their shame and
use some of the tools that we've talked
about on this podcast to explore it the
best way is the body the body tells you
when you're ashamed quicker than the
Mind ever will and so
there's a certain feeling that you get
when you're ashamed in your body and to
be able to be aware of that and to see
that happening that's great your mind
will often spin on shame so if you
notice that your mind is spinning
going over the same story over and over
and over again then you can see that
there's shame in that and then you can
start finding the beliefs in that as
well so that's another way to do it
using your intellect to find it the
other way to deal with it is just start
dealing with the shame that you can see
and then the other shames will present
themselves you know like it you solve
one and then the next one's come and
what you'll start noticing is that a lot
of the shames they
contradict themselves so if you say to
somebody who's like
um yeah I don't want to always be
talking
and say Okay cool so
are you good with like always being
quiet
like no Okay so
what's going on there what is it that
you actually want and what you'll notice
is that that want isn't
it isn't solidified in their their
system they're they're very clear on all
the things that they're not allowed to
want they're very clear on all the
things that they can't do but they
haven't actually found the solution that
goes okay I can do this and it's as
simple as people let's say smoking if
you're like okay so do you want smoke
they're like no are you sure I'm smoking
yes okay and do you want to never have a
cigarette again in your whole life
they're like no
it's like oh wow what's going on there
and and so really being able to feel
through your wants is another great
thing to intellectually see how many
double binds you're in with your own
shames
where you're you're in no win situations
where there's no way that you have an
out
and then to find your wants so that you
can see what the right out is that's
another those are really good useful
things and the other thing is to feel
the shame
all the way through so shame has a a
stagnation and the stagnation occurs
because you don't want to feel it you
don't want to think about it you push it
aside
and if you stop pushing it aside and you
say okay what is that thing and and how
do I love that because the shame is in a
weird way is the absence of love right
it and so if you can love that thing
that you're ashamed of then you can move
through it yeah it's almost even like an
absence of awareness it's like awareness
tends to naturally draw itself away from
where there's shame and it becomes just
this like kind of barren Wasteland in
the body that's right and if you bring
awareness back to it it's as though
shame as a
an emotion that blocks other emotions
it's like the in some emotional nemesis
yeah it does it stops that fluidity from
happening because we just like we don't
it feels so uncomfortable to us that we
just push it and anything that comes
with it aside
right and so people who are ashamed of
their sexuality they can't feel that
full desire they can't feel that full
wanting they can't and when they're
having sex they're not like fully deeply
into the pleasure
right it's like the sex is going to be
much quicker and harder and that they
can't actually
fully allow all the pleasure of that
sexual experience into their system and
it's the same thing with somebody eating
if they have a lot of Shame around their
food they're not able to just really you
know taste it and savor it and that's
not to say the people who don't taste
all have shame around their food that's
not what I'm saying or or that you can't
have like you know all sorts of sex and
enjoy it I'm just saying that the
capacity to enjoy it
goes away if you're if you have shame
and it sounds like there's a there's a
lot of subtlety here just with as there
is with any emotion if you if you look
at an emotion you're like okay I feel
sadness there could be more and more
subtle levels of sadness I mean more
more different subtle kinds of emotion
that are something next to sadness
Melancholy you know nostalgia
and the like and the same can be true
for shame and I notice that there's sort
of a progression that happens when we
start to do more emotional exploration
is that we start by just not being aware
of the emotion or we report it as we
feel good or we feel bad and then we
start to recognize the emotion saying oh
I feel shame and getting deeper it might
be oh I feel specifically the shame
around money but there's sometimes I
don't feel ashamed about making money
but maybe it's I feel ashamed about
making money if I don't feel like I'm
really creating value or like that it
came from some work ethic that was
trained up in me or I don't feel like
I'm if if I make the money but I don't
feel like
you know I deserve it or you know
there's all these different subtleties
but then also each of the subtleties you
can get lost in like oh I have this
particular subtle form of shame but then
creating that label of that shame is
still an intellectual barrier to
actually experiencing and feeling in the
body yeah and if you can feel and
experience it in the body you don't have
to name it you don't have to understand
very much of it like if somebody was
like what's the quickest way for me to
get through shame it's like every time
you feel it stop
invite it
love it
welcome it welcome it back anytime it
wants to come
and when it's ready then you move
and then you keep moving until the next
time you feel it if you just did that
you wouldn't have to understand anything
you would just more and more be in love
with your life and and each other and
and there's this fear like people think
oh okay but if I do that then I'll be
the psychopath and I won't
and I won't be able to
to you know I'll start hurting people
and I'll be only self-interested that's
the belief system but what actually
happens is that you become more and more
in love with yourself and everybody else
if you really feel the love for all the
things that you're ashamed of and that
love has a very strong moral compass
right the more that you're in love with
people the less it the the more painful
it is to do anything that would be
knowingly hurting them in the long run
you might be happy to hurt them in the
short run if it's for their great or
good but or for their greater good
but yeah yeah the very fact that you're
even asking this of yourself like well
what if what if I become a psychopath
like I don't I don't know of any
Psychopaths or like well what if I
became a psychopath and I didn't care
about people's feelings or how I'm
hurting people that's just not how a
psychopath operates so it's this moral
compass is even there in the belief
system that would hold you back from
feeling your shame oh that's beautiful
yeah I hadn't thought about it that way
that's beautiful right yeah another cool
thing you can do is you can say okay so
you you find yourself
you want something and you're ashamed of
that thing that you want
you can just ask yourself this simple
like this really cool and very simple
question which is
if I thought that I was inherently good
how would I interpret that want how
would I see that want
so if it's like oh I want a billion
dollars okay that's selfish that's
greedy I should be ashamed of that okay
and if you saw yourself as inherently
good what would you make of that want
oh I I see that I want security I see
that I want to
feel safe I see that I want to
um
be seen as important I see that I want
to help people I see that I want to
not be I want autonomy
and you would you could see what was
behind
the want
and so there's this what happens in
shame is that there has to be a belief
system that you're not inherently good
and if you can get in touch with your
inherent goodness
right and so what's what's interesting
is the idea that is if I let go of my
shame
I will be bad but what's actually
happening is if when you let go of your
shame you get in touch with your
inherent goodness yeah and I can also
see what our Notions of inherently good
mean might also color this as well it's
like you know what I just want to I just
want to become the leader of the Free
World so that I can finally implement
the surveillance and police state that
will finally make everybody safe right
because that's just my inherent goodness
coming out
yeah so
what I'm suggesting is more of when you
feel the shame
interpret it through the lens of your
inherently good
not using I'm inherently good to justify
to run your shame down and push it down
and justify your behavior that feels
like [__] inside of your system right
and so how do you notice the difference
between what you're doing there if
that's if that's the case yeah it your
body doesn't like it
like there's no way that the person
who's like I want to control everything
so that I feel safe
feels good in their body
like I've I've seen those people they're
incredibly rigid right they're held all
the time their shoulders are rocks right
they're like
those people are not not in conflict in
their body they've cut themselves off
from their body because if they felt
their body they would be screaming in
pain yeah so part of the practice here
is becoming more aware of the subtle
unconscious tensions in our body and the
conflict in our emotions and that's
that's just part of this entire Journey
and shame is one dimension on which to
make that exploration yeah so the way
like if you go back to our original
definition of Shame it's what Society
does
to tell you that you're not behaving
properly and it controls like it's that
mechanism but it's also the blocking of
emotions and so what all we're doing
here is we're actually
freeing the blocking of emotions by
feeling our body and creating love where
there was abandonment
it's as simple as that
it's just counteracting it yeah so from
that perspective it's there's a way that
you could see shame as a way that we
abandon ourselves there's there's some
part of us there's some natural instinct
there's some natural impulse to be fully
who we are and we abandon that part by
withdrawing from it in shame unless
there's the natural shame like I said
which is like I think there is a natural
shame if you're doing stuff that you
know there there's certain behaviors
that as humans if we do it we're going
to feel that shame probably with or
without a society
hurting people we love on purpose for
our own good for our own short-term good
is going to feel crappy in people's
bodies probably no matter whose body it
is unless they
are neurologically atypical yeah I think
part of what what we've been talking
about with exploring the shame and
bringing attention and love to it is
that it will distill into its more
natural form
and it won't entirely Go away You're Not
By by doing self-exploration in any
emotion you're not going to be able to
remove the experience of emotion just
because you're
working to deconstruct it if it's if
it's really meant to be there if there's
if there's really something in you
that's bringing up anger you're not
gonna you could suppress the anger but
you're not going to convince your system
to just fully release
the sense of something being violated
unless there's just a story to be seen
through and that story was just Vapor
all along yeah so I would say that with
all the emotions including shame if
you're trying to get rid of it then
you're not welcoming it so then you're
not actually loving it and it's like
saying it's like welcoming kids into the
house just so that you can get the [__]
rid of them like they don't feel loved
right so
the idea is that you are actually
welcoming the shame and you look forward
to feeling it in you and you invite it
it's not in any way to get rid of it and
as that happens it becomes more of its
natural expression rather than the
expression that people use to control
you when you were a kid or to control
you in society
and not to say that they're trying to
control you because they were bad
you know they were just passing on what
they had been learned what they had
learned yeah yeah and so this brings me
to another question which is
how we relate to others when others are
feeling shame uh you know when somebody
comes up and they get they give us an
apology with a bunch of Shame and we
talked about in the last episode how
that feels to receive and so if let's
let's say somebody in our lives is
repeating a shame Loop and you know
maybe the actions that they're taking
that shame Loop are hurting us maybe
it's maybe it's an employee who's you
know not delivering or not being honest
or maybe it's a partner or maybe it's a
brother who's addicted to some drug and
there's this
shame Loop and you see somebody in it
what's what's a way to be with them in
that shame yeah there's kind of two
things there the first one is if I just
see somebody in shame so
like the way Tara and I have decided to
raise our kids is that we don't shame
them we don't punish them and we don't
shame them
and what I've noticed in them is that
they will shame themselves like we don't
have to we don't have to do anything
when they do something that is not in
alignment with their moral compass man
they will shame themselves
and sometimes they'll even shame
themselves when I'm like that's that's
ridiculous like that like please don't
and I will literally say that to them
I'm like I see that you're ashamed and I
want I want you to know there's nothing
in me that wants you to be ashamed
you're welcome to be ashamed and I can
be with you while you're ashamed but I
just want you to know there's nothing in
me that wants you to be ashamed and get
just like imagine hearing that from your
parent you know in a moment of Shame
like it's makes me like Misty inside to
just think that I'm able to give that
gift to my girls so there's that and so
and I think that's so if you just see
somebody in shame
to be able to stand in love and say
there's nothing to be ashamed of is
great with that said and and even when
people do really have done some pretty
bad things to me out of their own
neuroses or whatever and you get a lot
of that as a coach you know I will say
to them hey I don't want you to do that
again and I might even stop our
relationship and I don't want you to
feel ashamed
and the reason I don't want them to feel
ashamed is because that's just going to
recreate the behavior
and if they can feel my love
then hopefully that behavior becomes
less
prevalent in their life
now if somebody's in a shame Loop and
they are doing something over and over
again and it's creating that bad habit
or it's locking that bad habit in place
then I think it's usually best to just
draw boundaries it's not to try to save
them from it it's to be clear and honest
with them and say Hey you know I don't
want you to be ashamed and
I don't want this kind of behavior in my
life and so when you're ready to not
have this kind of behavior you're always
welcome here
if somebody's in a loop that can be
really devastating for their lives and
for yours I mean that is drug addiction
that is
that is constantly stealing from
somebody and it's it's that kind of a
behavior
and so for me I I just draw boundaries
around it I don't and it doesn't make
sense it doesn't help them for me to be
codependent with them on it yeah one
thing that you mentioned in the way that
you relate to your daughters was you're
like I I don't want you to feel shame
you're also welcome to feel the shame if
you want to and I think that's an
important component here because
otherwise people could be like coming
from a place of trigger and frustration
with somebody who's in a shame cycle
around them be like stop feeling shame
and then that can just create a new
whole new shame a whole new shame
pattern around the shame yeah I did that
once or twice yeah exactly yeah their
shame was so uncomfortable for me that I
wanted them to stop it you know which
brings us back to apologies like hey I'm
sorry that I have feelings around your
shame and I'm trying to control you
I have I have shame
exactly
yeah yeah and I think the thing about
shame is it's a bit of a paper dragon in
the fact that our paper tiger I can't
remember which one is the phrase but
there's the
it melts with love
and it
in a weird way I would even say that
shame is
it's a version of love in the fact that
it is care so it's weird we feel shame
and we interpret that as oh there's
something wrong with us there's
something bad
there's something that's unacceptable in
US
and the only reason that we would think
that is because we care
to be good we care for other people like
it is the thing that shows us that we
love it is an action of love it is a it
is a sign of our inherent goodness
that we feel it and when you see it that
way instead of as the way as like this
horrific thing that you want to get rid
of
it really can transform and the way that
it looks when it transforms is it
it just kind of becomes a natural
guide rails about how you want to live
your life
and if you you know if you do that it's
going to feel crappy so you don't you
don't want to do that and so it's just
like that but it's not based on what
other people said it's based on your
love and how you want to be in the world
not based on
some weird authority figure who needed
to have
you know people act a certain way so
they can feel safe and in that sense it
feels like there's sort of a natural
progression of things where when you're
when you're a child it makes sense for
your parents your family your tribe to
install a new
the understanding of what is or isn't
accepted or what will or will not get
you ousted and then as you as you
develop and mature as an adult
you get to develop your own inner
compass and like connect more and more
to that to that Compass yourself and
inspect that shame and test it out and
see what really actually feels good now
that you understand the world a little
bit more you've
you've lived in it sometime and then
that locus of
that internal Compass becomes yours and
not something that you've just adopted
from the outside yeah the only thing I'd
change about that is that my experience
with my daughters is that the moral
compass is in them you know I wouldn't
say right from the start but it starts
developing around six five six years old
and there's this natural desire to be
to be good you know if if they haven't
been traumatized if they haven't been
shamed you know like right if you just
allow them to figure it out and listen
to themselves they'd learn this thing
very naturally it's a you know
they want to love and be loved humans
want to love and be loved and you
traumatize them you beat them up you
tell them that they're bad and they will
believe it and then they will stop
getting they will not be in touch with
that desire to love and be loved and
they will
start trying to make up with it for
control or dominance or violence or
whatever right so all those things just
delay the onset or perpetually perhaps
forever delay the onset or stunt the
onset of that that internal compass
compass and it's natural for it to arise
much earlier than we might expect if
we're bought into the belief systems
that shame is a you know shame is a tool
for social justice or shame is the way
that we teach people how to operate in
society yeah so one thing that what I've
noticed also is that uh
and something we've talked about before
is that one way to to relieve some shame
in our system is to share it uh if we've
been in a codependent pattern with
somebody just be like hey you know I
know that yeah I've been trying to
control you and I realize I've actually
just been avoiding my own shame and just
just noting it and saying that can be a
way for the whole thing to just start
dissolving in US absolutely that's what
AAA is built on that 12-step programs
are built on that promise right yeah
absolutely a lot of group work is built
on the premise of like oh if I bring my
shame out into the light and let people
see it
especially if those people still love me
and can still accept me then the shame
can vanish yeah so as we close this
episode my invitation here is that uh
I'm going to add all the things that I
wrote in my notebook last night that I'm
ashamed of into our show notes and I
also invite anybody else to go to our
website art of accomplishment.com
podcast and there's a feedback Forum
there you could just say hey here's some
shames
use a fictitious name if you want no
name we're not going to use names in the
in those show notes and as they come in
I'll just add them to the list and then
you can go check out and see what all
the different kinds of shames that
people have had that they've sent in and
see where some of them might show up in
you and be like wow I hadn't even
thought of that one but yeah that one's
real for me that's cool and also when
you're going through them and you go
that's ridiculous and anybody who's
ashamed of that and that's ridiculous
any evaluation into that know that
there's somebody out there looking at
your Shameless thinking the same thing
they're like they shouldn't be ashamed
of that that's just human that's just
natural
[Music]
awesome what a pleasure what a good idea
thanks for coming up with that one Brett
yeah all right thank you Joe thanks
everybody for listening yeah thank you
thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you enjoyed what you
heard today please subscribe and rate US
on your podcast app we'd love your
feedback so feel free to send us
questions or comments you can reach out
to us join our newsletter or check out
our courses at Art of accomplishment.com
[Music]